# Research Statment

This document was used to convey my research ideas to prospective dissertation committee members. I sent them a copy of this document that outlines my area of interest, possible research approach, and relevant citations.

## Area of research:

My research spans the socio-technical aspect of online information behavior (i.e. social informatics – looking at users in informal online settings such as forums) in the health context. My primary research interest would enrich our understanding of the behaviors and styles of communication in patient-to-patient interaction and the roles that emerge in informal groups. In particular, to be aware of patients with specific health disorders (i.e. depression, addictions) and the role that computer-mediated communication (CMC) plays in shaping social interaction. 

In my research, I will draw on my experiences in several disciplines (Computer Science and Library Science).  At California State University, Los Angeles (CSULA), I studied computer science, with a particular focus in web applications and automata theory. As an undergraduate student, I learned about software architecture and solving problems using a logical approach. At the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) Information Studies Department, my concentration was on informatics and information access. As a Masters student, my studies were located at the intersection of technology and public service, where computer applications were applied to library problems. I want to pursue deeper understanding of this area by researching the effects of internet technology on human behavior and make recommendations for improvement or for policy changes. 

My research will focus on online communities as support groups in mental health context, to explore the roles people have when interacting in online communication environments. The results from studies in this area would be significant because this is a new phenomenon.  In addition, the online setting affords users to easily connect with people who are geographically distant, which allows “patient experts” to pass along their experiences to other patients. By examining data on how patients operate in groups in virtual settings (i.e., looking at factors of gender, culture, ethnicity), we can increase recognition of patterns for recognizing symptoms or coping techniques. We can also translate the patient artifacts/advice for coping into materials that health professionals can provide to patients. This topic is interesting because I want to help people improve their moods and cope better with their conditions.

## Discussion of research ideas and goals:

While there are many research studies on patient-doctor communication, my research interest is patient-to-patient interaction in online health support groups to examine the effects of using CMC’s among patients. The reason why I am studying this is to better understand when these websites are helpful to which patients. Over the summer, I have been comparing the features provided in two well-known health social networking websites: MedHelp and PatientsLikeMe.  Examining these websites has shown that various features offer different purposes for communication. For instance, personal journals are typically used for documenting day to day personal experiences, while public forums are for asking questions. Social networking in health context is a relatively new phenomenon that is growing in popularity. Many “grassroots online communities” are available for patients to participate with greater role in their healthcare by gathering and sharing health information. (Fox, 2009) Sometimes patients or their caregivers may turn to Internet to seek support (i.e. advice and words of wisdom, sharing experiences), especially those who lack local resources. It would be useful to know who goes to websites online health support groups, to understand user demographics and information needs (i.e. coping techniques). Studies on cancer patients show that “their use [of these websites] by people experiencing breast cancer has been associated with lower levels of depression and improved quality of life” (Civan & Pratt, 2007).  However, it is unknown whether these online health support groups are just as effective for patients with mental health issues such as those suffering from PTSD, or even other health conditions such as early teen pregnancy, diabetes, or additions. The value in doing this work is that it uses a naturalistic, large dataset. The contribution from such a study would help us understand whether the websites that offer peer patient support are actually helpful for specific groups of patients such as those suffering from depression, addictions, or teen pregnancies. 

There are many avenues available for exploration for this topic, but for dissertation research my objective is to use textual analysis to examine online health support group discussion threads. By identifying and classifying the terms used into peer support types (informational, emotional, or instrumental), threads could be grouped for improved online discussion forum browsing experience. I will be working with Dr. Christopher Yang to develop an algorithm or term similarity measure for classifying threads by content. The end result would be lists of words or phrases that indicate each peer support type. Several directions for this study could be taken in analyzing user generated content: compare support types in across groups (i.e. alcoholics vs teen pregnancy), compare support types across website features (i.e. personal journals vs public forums), or even compare support types by gender. Future studies can use different samples of data sources (i.e. observing face-to-face group therapy sessions, other websites) or analyze additional variables besides gender (i.e. personality type, cultural background, intensity of health problems, etc).

Four additional research ideas that may be explored in the future, perhaps with collaborators from other disciplines:
 (1) Categorizing types of supportive roles patients give to each other for coping/treatment.  For instance, look at demographics – gender and ethnicity factors – in being emotional or factual. This type of social network analysis could point out characteristics users, such as active versus inactive participation. In addition, it may be useful to identify the gatekeepers (leaders of discussion and information sharing) in each community and suggesting organization scheme for online community artifacts. (Civan et al, 2009) 

(2) Improve patient-to-patient communication in sharing patient expertise, i.e. term matching tool. For instance, patients with different backgrounds may use different words to describe the same body part. It would be useful to analyze the content of discussion threads to find key phrases and their frequencies. This could lead to another useful application – tracking topic trends by day/ month or to see who posts more. 

(3) Analyze the features used in the community depending on which type of support (i.e. journal vs forum). Users may use journal entries to document daily experiences, while forum threads may be more suitable for factual discussions on something like medication. Each website feature may provide various insights into some patients’ transformation as they learn to cope with their situations. 
 
(4) Create an approach to automatically identify male-female ratio in these forums for mental health context.  Knowing this ratio is helpful in interpreting research findings about gender-based behavior for groups. There are gender differences in healthcare (i.e. men do not ask for help) and even in computer-mediated support (i.e. women are usually more active in seeking online health information than men). (Mo et al, 2009; Owen et al, 2003) Research questions may include: Are male or females more likely to give or receive support in these forums? Do men give more informational support than women? Do women give more emotional support than men? These research questions can be useful to health professionals who deal directly with patients.

## Possible Approach:

Machine learning techniques is mainly used for classification of text and can be used for many applications that require sorting multiple documents into categories, such as movie reviews, spam filtering, or technical articles. Textual analysis would measure similarity between terms and classify them into the different types of support.  Statistical analysis would be used for summarizing demographic information, such as gender ratios or geographic location. 

Data will be gathered by crawling through an online health support group website (i.e. Medhelp discussion forum on one topic) and stored into a database. Many studies have shown that patients and health professionals use different vocabulary, so studying the patients’ own words will enlighten us about the types of support they give each other in a natural language and setting. IRB approval may be required for using this data and if necessary, will be obtained. One community will be selected from the hundreds available, based on the size (at least a hundred members who subscribe to the community and few hundred postings), previous studies (avoid replicating studies and having less than significant research findings), and accessibility to data. 

There are many text classification methods to choose from, depending on unit of analysis (term, phrase, or sentence level) and either generative or discrimitive method.  Advanced methods such as sentiment detection may also be appropriate for use in classifying discussion threads.

## Limitations
There may be limitations on data availability, depending on what is publicly available on the website(s). It will take some time to crawl through hundreds of dynamically generated web pages and to tweak the crawler to get the right data. 

# References

Civan A & Pratt W. (2007) Threading Together Patient Expertise, Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Fall Symposium Nov. 2007, Chicago IL., p. 140-144.

Civan, A., McDonald, D. W., Unruh, K. T., & Pratt, W. (2009). Locating patient expertise in everyday life. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting group work.

Fox, S. (2009). Participatory Democracy, Participatory Medicine. Pew Internet Commentary on Health. Apr 17, 2009. http://www.pewinternet.org/Commentary/2009/April/1--Participatory-Democracy-Participatory-Medicine.aspx

Mo, P. K. H., Malik, S. H., & Coulson, N. S. (2009). Gender differences in computer-mediated communication: A systematic literature review of online health-related support groups. Patient Education and Counseling, 75(1), 16-24.

Owen, J. E., Yarbrough, E. J., Vaga, A., & Tucker, D. C. (2003). Investigation of the effects of gender and preparation on quality of communication in Internet support groups. Computers in Human Behavior, 19(3), 259-275.

